Huscarls,
the elite [music] Northmen of the Viking
Age who channel the legendary ferocity
of the berserker spirit, but tempered
with cold discipline and unwavering
resolve.
At least, this is their common form in
the popular imagination.
However, when [music] we attempt to dive
into the sources themselves, we find
them either lacking in detail or colored
by the assumptions of authors writing
centuries later.
The end result is a Frankensteined
mashup of ancient Norse traditions,
mythologized sagas, and later chivalric
concepts.
Today, we will seek to separate fact
from fiction in bringing these elite
warriors to life.
From their origins
to their equipment,
their organization,
and their service history.
This is the story of the Huscarls.
You can lead your own war host of
Huscarls with today's sponsor, Mount &
Blade II: Bannerlord, which is now 50%
off the base game and 20% off the War
Sails naval DLC through April 27th.
Mount & Blade is a series I've been
playing for a long time now and deeply
enjoy, not only for the awesome
gameplay, but the truly unique history
nerd experience of being actually able
to take part in a medieval battle.
In case you've been living under a rock,
Mount & Blade II is a strategy action
RPG where you get to build up your
faction on a world map with trade,
diplomacy, conquests, and more.
There's a ton of customization and
empire management features, but for me
the best is actually the battles where
you can lead them in person. Not only
can you ride, shoot, and fight the enemy
to your heart's content, but you can
actually set up formations and command
units as the fighting unfolds. This
includes everything from raids to
full-on land battles and sieges. And now
with the War Sails DLC, you experience a
Norse inspired faction with their own
full fleets and naval warfare features.
It's truly great for the Huskarl
experience.
So, take advantage of the Steam Medieval
Sale to get Mount & Blade II at 50% off
and the War Sails DLC at 20% off now
through April 27th.
Enjoy.
We should begin with a disclaimer.
When most people think of a Huskarl,
they probably think of a hulking elite
Norseman of the early medieval era
wielding a massive axe.
This is often how they have been
portrayed in television and video games.
However, such depictions are only
loosely based on the limited medieval
evidence with lots of ancient and modern
tropes built into the caricature.
The truth is that the Huskarls were a
broad [music] category of soldier,
essentially the personal retinue of the
elite within the Scandinavian world for
much of the 10th and 11th centuries. And
what that could actually mean varied
widely.
Some Huskarls were close-knit groups
[music] of carefully chosen personal
bodyguards loved and trusted by their
leader.
But by the end of that time, it seems
that the kingdoms of Denmark, [music]
Norway, Sweden, and England had
thousands of Huskarls. Using them not
only as bodyguards, [music] but also as
military administrators, garrisons, and
the core of their armies.
This latter role greatly expands [music]
how we might think of them.
But at the same time, it must be
acknowledged that our sources on
Huskarls are highly problematic to the
extent that we do not even know if some
Huskarl units were actually be
The most contemporary records are
runestones put up to memorialize
specific housecarls, but they contain
very little practical information.
On the other hand, our most extensive
sources on housecarl units maintained by
prominent elites were usually written
decades or even centuries later and
contain scant military details.
This is especially true of Danish rulers
for whom the earliest narrative [music]
sources were written in the 12th
century.
Then, there are the sagas
which often tie the housecarls to
>> [music]
>> semi-legendary units such as the
Jomsvikings mercenary group.
Even the better attested [music]
Anglo-Danish housecarls of England are
discussed mainly by far later sources.
Thus, we see that the lack of
contemporary evidence is a massive
problem.
Furthermore, many medieval writers had a
habit of wrapping [music] the past in
their own values, aesthetics, and
terminology to make history more
approachable.
Some sources like Geoffrey Gaimar's
[music] history of the English, for
instance, uses the word knight to
describe men who, from the context, must
have been housecarls.
This means that when we read of
housecarls having a virtuous moral code
that looks rather chivalric or as having
similar social and military roles to a
knight, it is difficult to trust whether
this was actually true at the time of
the soldiers rather than merely the time
of the author.
With these disclaimers [music]
in mind, let's now do our best to
reconstruct the history of the
housecarls.
We can begin with the early development
of the housecarls as the personal
bodyguards of the Scandinavian elite.
In this context, Huskarl literally means
house man.
This was apparently a reflection of the
common practice for early Huskarls to
live in the same house as their lord.
As such, house men usually acted as
bodyguards and were part of a broader
military following of a Scandinavian
chieftain known as the herd.
The existence of this sort of personal
retinue is not at all surprising as it
has arisen across most societies of
ancient history and was especially
prominent among the tribal groups of
nearby Germania and Gaul.
Presumably, the leaders of the north had
long relied on bodyguards for support in
politics and in war.
With the medieval period we are
interested in, some of the earliest
references to these first Huskarls
appear on rune stones dating to the 10th
and 11th centuries.
For example, the Skarthi Stone of 982
reads,
"King Svein placed the stone in memory
of Skarthi, his retainer, who travels to
the west but who died at Hedeby."
Another rune stone, U 335, created
sometime in the 10th or 11th century
reads,
"Holmi had this stone raised and this
bridge made in memory of Hera, his
father, Sigroth's Huskarl."
As you can see, these records affirm the
presence of Huskarls at the time but
provide very little information about
the nature of these house men.
For a better understanding, we can
broaden our scope to gain more context
on their environment.
Here, we find ourselves in the late 10th
to 11th century during the reign of
Sweyn Forkbeard
who was king of Denmark from 986, king
of Norway from 1000,
>> [music]
>> and briefly king of England from
December 1013.
By this time, increased trade and the
gradual centralization of the
Scandinavian kingdoms had allowed kings
to expand their housecarls from personal
bodyguards of a few dozen men to small
armies in the hundreds or low thousands.
As the Skerry Stone indicates, the
housecarls followed their leader on
foreign raids, and when Danish kings
came for the English throne in the early
11th century, they did so surrounded by
faithful housecarls like the late
Skerry.
From here, the evidence of the
housecarls improves thanks mainly to
English monastic chronicles.
When King Cnut secured England in 1016,
[music]
he reorganized the military.
His invasion force, which seems to have
been mostly mercenaries, was disbanded
except for the services of around 3,000
retainers that would become the
Anglo-Danish housecarls.
They were mainly drawn from Cnut's
pre-existing housecarls, but some,
around 10 to 15%, were either English
warriors willing to bend the knee or
foreign adventurers of varied
backgrounds.
These housecarls are the best attested
of all housecarl type soldiers, and
[music] it is this force that we will
focus on today.
To start off, let's zoom in all the way
to see what these warriors would have
looked like in person.
Here we find that the weapons and armor
of a housecarl would have been highly
personalized. [music]
While there were certainly cultural
norms to drive some amounts of
conformity, there was no official
standard of equipment.
Furthermore, weapons and armor would be
passed down, captured, repurposed, and
traded across Northwest Europe to the
point where there was no meaningful
difference between the gear adopted by
elites of Scandinavia, England, or the
northern Carolingian Empire.
That being said, there were some broad
similarities in how such troops tended
to be kitted out for their role as elite
infantry.
For defense, they would have worn mail,
carried a shield, and had metal helmets.
These helmets were usually conical with
a plate covering the nose,
but they could vary in style depending
on personal preference.
For offense, a sword [music] was
typical.
Alongside these might have been carried
javelins, known as darrotha, or perhaps
even the francisca throwing axes made
famous by the Franks.
Such projectiles would have been thrown
at relatively close range to disrupt
formations before closing in to close
quarters.
Here, it seems that one of the weapons
the huscarls were most famous for
wielding was their axe, the Dane axe or
Danish long axe, known in Old Norse as
the breiðöx or broad axe, was a fearsome
weapon capable of splitting shields and
skulls with ease.
From depictions on the Bayeux Tapestry,
it seems that the axe and the shield
were worn on the warrior's back and
swapped depending on the needs of the
battle.
The smaller version of this axe
typically had a handle length of 1 to
1.2 m.
The axe head was forged to be very thin,
[music] designed to slice rather than
smash, with a cutting edge of 20 to 30
cm, and it weighed around 1 to 1.2 kg.
The larger version of this axe had a
handle length of 1.5 to 1.7 m with axe
heads weighing around 2 kg.
The extent to which these larger axes
were actual weapons is debated as they
seem too large to be practical [music]
and some examples are inlaid with
precious metals typical of ceremonial
rather than combat weapons though we
would not wish to be hit by one
regardless.
Finally, although the huscarls fought
primarily as infantry, they often used
horses for mobility to raid over a wide
area or reach targets [music]
faster than an infantry force could
respond.
This was especially important to Viking
chiefs whose raids could only last as
long as it took the Anglo-Saxons to
mobilize a response.
As soon as English spearmen were
spotted, they could simply leave the
area rather than having to fight their
way back to their ships.
Given how personally and militarily
important huscarls were to their leader,
minimizing risk through mobility was
essential.
In terms of how such men came to be
huscarls, it seems many would have been
trained from a young age to fight though
not as part of [music] any formalized
institution.
In the era when huscarls were simply
small units of bodyguards, it seems
unlikely that many were trained at all
but rather they were chosen from
naturally talented people who had proven
their worth.
This sort of selection process is
heavily emphasized in the legendary tale
of the Jomsvikings mercenary group whose
members only joined after displaying
exceptional skill in battle or even
challenging existing members in trials
by combat.
Initiation would then be accompanied by
special rites and rituals.
Eventually, as huscarls evolved from
personal bodyguards to the
institutionalized core of royal armies,
they must have adopted a more formal
training program to maintain the
manpower pool.
However, nothing remotely reliable
survives as to what this training
entailed.
Presumably, it involved some degree of
activities to build [music] their
strength, stamina, and dexterity.
This might involve carrying logs,
throwing stones, running, swimming, and
shoving one another with shields.
Basic unit drills might have practiced
how to march, maneuver, and adopt
formations such as the defensive shield
wall or offensive wedge.
But, the greatest and most common source
of training was actual combat.
At this point, we can now consider how
individual soldiers were organized into
units.
Unfortunately, the sources for the
internal organization of the huscarls
are even worse than the already vague
descriptions of their origins,
equipment, and training.
Early medieval Scandinavia varied
considerably in its social and military
organization.
Thus, we will be forced to present
[music] a broad simplified model.
Here, a chieftain would have an armed
following of paid men called a herd.
Though some sources also use the words
lid or drot.
Among these were various types of
[music] soldier, the most elite of which
were the huscarls. The number of
huscarls among the earliest units was
small enough that subdivisions were
unnecessary.
In later years, as they became more
widely expanded by the Anglo-Danes,
huscarls would have been broken up into
various units and distributed around the
kingdom.
As for their leadership structure,
housecarls answered directly to their
chief, but also to the housecarls as a
collective body, presumably with some
form of officer hierarchy.
Unfortunately, again, not much is known
about this method of organization.
Some sources claimed in the 1180s that
they followed the Witherlock,
a legal code of conduct.
That this code first appears over a
century after the heyday of the
housecarls makes it dubious, and it is
thought to reflect 12th-century Danish
law far more than it does 11th-century
England.
However, it seems that housecarls
renewed their allegiance annually,
that they had an internal legal system
to handle disputes, and that some
housecarls were granted estates for
their service.
Here, we must once more point out some
nuance.
Although housecarls are often portrayed
as a standing force of warriors, it
seems that this was not the case when
the housecarls of Forkbeard and Cnut
were introduced to England.
Interestingly enough, in these instances
when the royal housecarls appear in
English records, they often do so
primarily [music] as tax collectors or
judges, and many appear to rule lands of
around four hides on average.
This has led some historians [music] to
argue that there was no meaningful
difference between an Anglo-Danish
housecarl and the Anglo-Saxon thanes
they were often replacing or working
with.
For context, the thanes of the kingdom
of England were already established as a
heavily institutionalized elite with
joint military, judicial, and
administrative responsibilities.
As a result, any invader wishing to take
over England had to fit themselves into
this system.
Whether by a Saxon Thane, a Danish
housecarl, or a Norman knight, that role
of a landed warrior administrator had to
be filled, or else the kingdom could not
be ruled.
Thus, if there were unique quirks to the
organization and character of Forkbeard
and Cnut's housecarls before they
arrived in England, these were likely
ironed out as they were assimilated into
this role.
Now, with all this context in mind about
how the housecarls came to be, let's
finally turn to a discussion of what
they looked like in action.
This is admittedly a difficult task. The
service history of the housecarls is
essentially a history of 11th century
Scandinavia and England, and given how
many of them would join the Varangian
Guard, it is perhaps also the history of
11th to 12th century Byzantium.
Such a vast expanse of time is beyond
the scope of this video and can better
be covered by other episodes in our
series.
Thus, to keep things manageable, we will
instead focus on two particular
campaigns to give you a sense of their
character in battle and how their role
evolved.
The first campaign covers the raids and
invasion against England by Sweyn
Forkbeard in the early 11th century,
when the housecarls first appear in
force in the historical record.
We will then skip ahead to the defense
of England in 1066 by Harold Godwinson,
when the housecarls would fight one of
their most audacious campaigns and be
eclipsed at Hastings by a new form
socio-military elite in the Norman
knight.
So, let's start with the first example.
In the late 10th century, the new king
of Denmark, Sweyn Forkbeard, set his
sights on England.
His housecarls were the core of his
raiding force, landing in scattered
groups and raiding widely on horseback
before returning to their ships with
slaves and loot.
Sweyn was known to place a great deal of
trust in his retainers.
He seems to have trusted them with
tactical autonomy, and several of the
few surviving runestones dedicated to
housecarls were put up by Sweyn himself.
Raids [music] on England only
intensified after Forkbeard took Norway
in the winter of 999 to 1000.
And it was during the raids of the 11th
century that roaming housecarls came to
understand the limitations of
Anglo-Saxon defenses.
The fyrd system could mobilize an
impressive amount of manpower with
urgency, but it also [music] anchored
the English military around a network of
fortified hubs that could be
circumvented and isolated.
In short, his plan was to strike fast
with housecarls in ships and then move
inland by horse.
Previous raids meant they knew where the
English defenses were weak and which
English nobles would submit first. And
so, he first landed at Sandwich.
Then, moving north by ship, he received
the submission of coastal magnates
before moving inland via the Humber,
then through the Trent before
disembarking at Gainsborough.
The Anglo-Saxon Chronicle describes the
speed with which he took the country.
Quote,
"Then Earl Uhtred and all Northumbria
submitted to him immediately, and all
the people of Lindsey, and then the
people belonging to the five boroughs,
and soon afterwards all the Danes to the
north of Watling Street, and he was
given hostages from every shire.
After he realized that all the people
had submitted to him, he gave orders
that his host should be provisioned and
supplied with horses.
He then turned southward with his whole
[music] force, committing his ships and
hostages to his son, Cnut.
After he crossed Watling Street, they
did the greatest mischief that any host
was capable of and made their way to
Oxford, and the citizens immediately
surrendered and gave hostages, and from
there to Winchester, where they did the
same.
Then, they went east to London, and a
greater part of his host was drowned in
the Thames because they did not bother
to look out for a bridge.
When he came to the borough, the
citizens would not submit, but held out
against them with the utmost valor
because King Ethelred was inside.
Then Sweyn turned toward Wallingford,
and so over the Thames westward to Bath,
and encamped there with his levies.
Then came Earl Æthelmær
and the thanes [music] of the west, and
they all submitted to Sweyn and gave him
hostages.
Having made his way thus far, he turned
northward to his ships, and the whole
nation accepted him as their undisputed
king.
Thereafter the citizens of London
submitted and gave hostages because they
were afraid he would destroy them.
At this time, nothing went right for the
nation.
Here we see how the fast-moving, [music]
hard-hitting nature of these huscarls
proved critical in conquering all of
England in roughly 2 [music] months.
Forkbeard would die just 5 [music] weeks
later and 2 years of war between
Ethelred and Cnut resulted in Cnut's
victory.
But here we can see that the huscarls of
Forkbeard fought very differently from
what is typically thought about them.
The huscarl is often thought of as a
formidable, immovable man with a big
axe.
But in this pivotal campaign, they tried
hard to avoid combat and when they did
have to fight around London, [music]
they lost.
That they lost to Londoners is not
surprising. The London militia would
humble William the Conqueror as well.
But it reveals something about this unit
that they often relied on mobility and
reputation more than their actual
[music] prowess in combat.
And the threat of rampaging Viking
huscarls was perhaps even more of a
strategic asset than the huscarls were
in battle.
If Forkbeard's men did not have the
reputation they had built up [music]
over two decades of raiding the Isles,
they would not have surrendered quickly
and the plan would not have worked.
For our second example of a more
stereotypical huscarl, we have to skip
ahead a half century to 1066.
With the throne of England once again
disputed and two invaders coming to take
it, Harold Godwinson mobilized all the
forces he could.
But as summer ended with no signs of
imminent invasion, he marched to London
and began disbanding in army only to
learn that Harald Hardrada of Norway had
landed and taken York.
After covering 185 miles in just four
days of marching, the two Haralds faced
each other at the Battle of Stamford
Bridge with huscarls at the core of both
armies.
The English advance had been so rapid
that the Norwegian army had not
discovered it and were taken completely
by surprise on the western side of
Stamford Bridge, though its exact
location is not known.
Details of the battle are scarce, but it
is clear that the Norwegians were
unprepared and were forced to retreat
across the bridge or be crushed.
To buy time to reorganize the army,
Norwegian huscarls fought a delaying
action on the bridge itself.
According to the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle
and Henry of Huntingdon, this was a lone
Norwegian axeman in mail, and he killed
40 Englishmen before one of Godwinson's
men floated underneath the bridge and
stabbed him with a spear through a gap
in the bridge's [music] planks.
His equipment and strong sense of
loyalty is entirely consistent with a
huscarl, albeit one who fought with the
ferocity of the legendary berserkers.
When the English army moved across the
bridge to face what remained of the
Norwegian force, both sides seem to have
gone back and forth in shield walls.
The English slowly forced the Norwegians
back over a series of pushes, and as the
Norwegian lines slowly lost cohesion and
gaps emerged, Harald Hardrada was killed
by an arrow to the neck and many other
leaders were killed.
With no orders from above and gaps in
the line emerging everywhere, the
Norwegians disintegrated and were
overrun.
Here we see that the housecarls fulfill
a more popular image as an immovable
hulking mass of warriors.
And the shield wall was essential to
this.
The Norwegians were on the defensive
from the start and Godwinson was well
aware that he needed to preserve
manpower should the Duke of Normandy
decide to sail after all.
There was no dramatic charge and the
housecarls were used cautiously by both
armies.
Under the circumstances, the housecarls
on both sides performed extremely well.
It is remarkable that the Norwegians
held out for hours against English
assaults despite being taken by surprise
and the axes of the English housecarls
were no doubt vital in creating gaps in
the Norwegian shield wall.
Unfortunately for Godwinson, the Duke of
Normandy had indeed decided to sail
right at the end of the campaigning
season and landed in southern England
just 3 days after the Battle of Stamford
Bridge.
Amazingly, Harold Godwinson once more
undertook another forced march all the
way south taking up a position on a hill
with forests to the east and west and
marshlands to the southwest to protect
the flanks.
As at Stamford Bridge, the core of his
army were the housecarls supplemented by
feared spearmen.
According to the Bayeux Tapestry and the
written sources, his formation was
primarily in a tight shield wall
interspersed with men wielding
two-handed axes.
The role of the housecarls in this
battle is not especially clear, so let's
briefly go through the battle as a
whole.
The Battle of Hastings opened with a
rain of Norman arrows, which had no
effect against the English shield wall.
After this, William ordered all three of
his divisions to attack.
With the English lobbing javelins and
rocks at them as they walked up the
hill.
When the Norman infantry failed to dent
the shield wall, the cavalry was sent in
and also failed.
The Bretons on William's left flank
retreated,
which threatened to become a route as
the English forces broke their own
formation to pursue.
The Bayeux Tapestry shows housecarls
working with the shield wall, but using
their axes rather than a sword and
shield, which implies offensive tactics
on their part.
One interpretation of this is that when
the Bretons retreated, the shield wall
parted to allow the housecarls to give
chase with their axes.
At the same time, rumors that William
had been killed circulated, further
discouraging the Normans.
However, William rode through his
retreating men to show he was alive,
rallied them, and with the English
having abandoned their position on the
hill and broken up their shield wall to
pursue, they were a prime target for the
Norman cavalry charge.
Although the English were able to
retreat back up the hill and reform
their shield wall, they lost a lot of
men before they could do so, and a lull
in the fighting took over as the English
recovered and the Normans reconsidered
their strategy.
If it was indeed the housecarls leading
the English attack,
then they would have taken serious
losses, and the core of Godwinson's army
was greatly diminished.
Again, the Normans attacked the shield
wall.
And again, they retreated. This time, on
purpose.
This feigned flight led to some English
troops taking the bait, at which point
they were cut down by Norman knights.
A repeat of this tactic was less
successful, and the two sides seemed to
have settled into a more traditional
back and forth clash of spearmen as the
afternoon wore on, with the English
forces being whittled down through
attrition as William threw spearmen,
cavalry, and arrows at the opposing
line.
The fight was brutal for both sides,
with William losing his horse at least
twice.
As the shield wall lost cohesion over
many hours, Harold Godwinson was struck
in the face by an arrow or run down by a
knight or both.
And many other commanders fell
throughout the afternoon.
The end of the English army and its
housecarls is recorded with glee by
William of Poitiers, William the
Conqueror's chaplain.
Quote:
Dismayed at the implacable bearing of
the duke who spared none who came
against him
and whose prowess could not rest until
victory was won,
they began to fly as swiftly as they
could. Some on horseback, some on foot,
some along the roads, but most over the
trackless country.
Many lay on the ground bathed [music] in
blood. Others who struggled to their
feet found themselves too weak to
escape.
While a few, although disabled, were
given strength to move by fear.
Many left their corpses [music] in the
depths of the forest, and others were
found by their pursuers lying [music] by
the roadside.
Although ignorant of the countryside,
the Normans eagerly carried on the
pursuit and striking the rebels in the
back brought a happy end to this famous
victory.
Between the Battle of Stamford Bridge
and the Battle of Hastings, Harold
Godwinson had summoned all the
housecarls he could.
While some had been left to guard the
north, their resistance generally melted
away.
Now, as control of England turned to the
Normans, many of its housecarls would
sell their skills to the Byzantines by
joining the Varangian Guard.
Meanwhile, the open positions they left
behind in the administrative and
military system would be replaced by the
Norman knight.
Over the years, this changing of roles
would phase out the historical use of
the term housecarl. [music]
Meanwhile, the housecarls of
Scandinavia, who had not been replaced
through invasion, would gradually morph
closer and closer to knighthood
themselves.
Thus, the housecarls faded from [music]
history,
if only as a title.
Meanwhile, the existence of an elite
bodyguard retinue would live on evolving
over the centuries as it had for
hundreds of years.
We hope you enjoyed [music] this delve
into the history of one of the iconic
yet misunderstood units of medieval
Europe.
What units of history should we cover
next?
A huge thanks to the patrons for funding
the channel and to the researchers,
[music] writers, and artists for making
this episode possible. Be sure to like
and subscribe [music]
for more content and check out these
other related episodes.
See you in the next one.